One of the most controversial things
that I've said about Google Ads in the
last couple years is that smart betting
has made negative keywords
irrelevant. Or has it? So, I've seen
some of the biggest gains this year, not
from adding negative keywords, but from
removing them. Yep, I said removing. And
the reason is that most people overdo it
when it comes to negative keywords. So,
if we jump into an account, then we have
an example here of a DSA campaign where
we're where we're comparing
year-over-year. And we can just see that
the amount of clicks we're getting this
year is massively more than last year. I
think it's about 3x and we're getting to
almost 3x revenue. All for making sure
that we're not doing two things. The two
things that we shouldn't be doing is we
shouldn't add proactive negative
keywords, which are the negative
keywords that represent keywords you
already have in the account. So if you
have a keyword Nike running shoes in the
account, don't exclude it from your DSA.
The second thing is that most people
will overdo adding negative keywords
before they have any statistical
significant data to actually be added.
So that's what we're going to talk about
today. But before we talk about this
today, then let's talk about why this
even became a thing. The most common
belief is that negative keywords help
you save money by cutting waste, by
improving rowers. And that used to be
100% true 5 years ago, but smart bidding
flipped the script on it.
[Music]
It doesn't just bid by the keyword like
we used to do, like I used to do
manually. We set a bid for every single
manual keyword. It bids at the search
term level. If a specific search term
isn't converting, then smart bidding
lowers the bid automatically without me
having to do anything. No need for you
to exclude it manually. In other words,
it already acts like a negative keyword
system, but with more data and faster
action time and more actions than we
will have. So, here's the mistakes. You
keep adding negative heroes like it's
2018. You add them once based on your
gut feeling or one bad week or nine
clicks and no conversions and the result
is that you're cutting out search terms
that might have just needed a lower bid
or a different season to perform or
simply just needed more time. Let me
break it down how smart bidding handles
this better than you can. Number one is
that a search term might be profitable
on desktop but not on mobile. Smart
bidding adjusts for that. The second one
is that a search term might lose money
at a $1 cost per click, but it will kill
it. It will be perform excellently at 25
cents. Again, smart bidding handles that
nuance. The third example is that in
shopping campaigns, a search term could
be unprofitable for one product, but
great for another. You can't segment for
that, but smart bidding can. In all
three cases, if you go in with your
hammer and you
start start excluding the terms that
aren't working according to you, then
you lose revenue and you can't scale.
Full stop. So, does that mean that we
should stop using negative keywords
altogether? No. But we just need to be a
heck of a lot more strategic about how
we use them. Here's when negative
keywords still matter. Number one, when
a search term performs poorly over a
long period like 6 to 12 months,
especially if it's low volume and smart
bing just doesn't have enough data to
react, that's when you should add it as
a negative keywords. The second example
is that in the early stages of a new
account or campaign when there's not
enough conversion history for smart bank
to work, then you should obviously also
add it. And thirdly, of course, all the
dumb stuff like that you don't need
statistical significant data to actually
use like competitors or totally
irrelevant products, totally irrelevant
search terms, that stuff should
obviously be excluded immediately. Now,
let me try to show you how I actually do
this because adding negative keywords
should not be done on a onetoone basis,
but should just follow a system, follow
a Google sheet, and it's the easiest
thing in the world. So, here we have a
madeup example of negative keywords. So
the way that this works is that I've
pulled in all of the search terms and
the data. I've calculated the row as
myself and I've calculated a
clickbucket. The clickbucket is used to
show whether or not we have 0 to 10
clicks, 10 to 20, 20 to 30, 30 to 50, 50
plus. That's where we look at
statistical significance. The reason why
we're calculating rorowas in here
instead of pulling it in is because
often it can become an issue when we try
to aggregate rorowas like again average
on averages. We don't want that. I just
I never pull rows in. I always calculate
it manually because we can also do some
other things over here. So of course
this is of course a calculated metric
over in the pivot table. But what we do
is I create two pivot tables. One I
create a pivot table where the search
term has the rows below 200%. And here I
have it at a row above 600%. Like you
might see here okay we have a total
spend of 136,000 and we get 35,000 chron
revenue meaning we get a 25% ro. This is
horrible obviously, but you can't just
pull out the 136,000. That's the issue
that we talked about before where we
just go willy-nilly because it's all of
these zero to 10 search terms. They
don't have statistical significant data
in order to actually exclude anything.
But it's also here where the biggest
amount of waste is. The problem is that
if we exclude all of these, then we're
also going to exclude this line, which
is where we get 600,000 revenue at a
2,000% ROS. So, we can't exclude this
without excluding this. And you might
say, of course, we can, Andrew. We just
don't exclude the search terms that are
down here. Get it? But the search terms
that are in from 0 to 10 and have this
kind of revenue, there will be a part of
those that we want in the future that
are going to be in here. So, if one of
these get one more click and it
converts, then it actually automatically
goes into this one because it's it
doesn't have a lot of clicks. So, it's
going to immediately have a super high
row. So, you can't exclude these and you
borderline can't exclude these. It
depends a little bit on how we actually
work with it. So what I do here is that
I go in and I say, okay, if I take out
these three buckets, meaning everything
over 20 clicks, then I find 24,000 in
spend that I can remove. That's very
very little. It's like 3 and a half% of
the total spend. If I take this one in
in with it as well, and that's what I
try to show over here, then we get
46,000 and spend around 7%. That's
roughly where we land when we try to
make these do these exercises on
accounts that are working well is that
we find out that roughly between four to
8% is the actual negative keyword or
spend we can actually remove by adding
negative keywords. I would still
potentially be scared about this bucket
because it is potentially a lot of the
revenue we also remove. Again 10 to 20
might actually be good to remove. So, I
would consider it depending on whether
or not this account actually need a lot
of push back, whether or not we are
trying to optimize for profit or we're
trying to scale. If we're trying to
scale, then I would actually not remove
these. I would just let it be, but I
would definitely remove these. Again,
doesn't have that big of an impact, but
that's not what we're talking about
here. We don't want to just do stuff to
make an impact. We actually want it to
work properly in the account moving
forward. All of this data was pulled via
Super Metrics. You can also use data
slayer or you can just export directly
from Google Ads. We do some aggregating
and that's it. It's it's pretty pretty
simple. To summarize what it is that
we've done today, I want you to remember
a couple of things. One, smart bidding
has made negative keywords less
impactful than ever before. Two, most of
the time when you add negatives, you're
more likely to exclude revenue than to
actually save money. So, look at your
account before you start just excluding
and adding negatives. Because if you're
in a scaling mode, you don't want to
exclude that revenue. But if you're in a
mode where you just can't get up to the
rose level where you want to be, then
maybe you want to exclude some of that
revenue to lower some of that scale but
become profitable. So again, depends
where your account is right now. Third
thing is only add negative keywords when
you have enough data and when smart
bidding hasn't already solved the
problem for you. And keep two lists.
This is something we didn't mention
before, but have two negative keyword
lists that you add them from. Evergreen
is the horribly performing. You never
want to see those keywords again. And
then you have low season. Low season is
if you're selling, let's say you're
selling swimsuits and then in February,
some search terms might not work and
that should be added as negative
keywords, but in May, June, July,
they're going to perform exceptionally
well. Put them on a low season negative
keyword list that you can remove when
you get into your peak season or you
that you can remove when you go to Black
Friday, you can remove during Christmas
and stuff like that. And the fifth part
is that remember to prune these things
regularly. Don't just have negative
keywords that just that you added from
2018 because it will change in
performance and it will change over
time. So from here I want you to do
three things. One, if you have never
touched your negative keywords, try
removing all your negative keywords.
Seriously, just remove them. Let smarter
bidding do its thing for 4 weeks. Then
come back, run the methodology that I
show you here today and see what
happened. Two, build all this into your
optimization routine once a year at a
minimum. Try to remove all negative
keywords and just see what happens.
You'll be surprised at how many bad
search terms turn out to be winners once
you get out of the way because again it
changes depending on you get new
products, your categories or brands are
expanded. Your competitors can change,
your prices can change, your promotional
strategy can change. That means that a
negative keyword that didn't work a year
ago might start working now. So, I hope
you enjoy this video. I have a new video
coming out every single week. Just post
comments and questions in in the comment
section and I'll be there to answer
anyone along the way. If you're into
practical PBC insights that you can
actually help you, then subscribe. I
share tips, breakdowns, and call out
what's working and what's not. No fluff,
just the stuff that you you can use
every single